\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename pimacs.info
@settitle Pimacs User Manual
@c %**end of header

@copying
@quotation
Copyright @copyright{} 2026 Anantha Kumaran.

You can redistribute this document and/or modify it under the terms
of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any
later version.

This document is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE@.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

@end quotation
@end copying

@ifhtml
@html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/highlight.js/11.11.1/styles/default.min.css">
<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/highlight.js/11.11.1/highlight.min.js"></script>

<!-- and it's easy to individually load additional languages -->
<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/highlight.js/11.11.1/languages/lisp.min.js"></script>

<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://unpkg.com/highlightjs-copy/dist/highlightjs-copy.min.css">

<script src="https://unpkg.com/highlightjs-copy/dist/highlightjs-copy.min.js"></script>


<script>
hljs.registerAliases(["example"], { languageName: "shell" });
hljs.configure({
  cssSelector: "div.example > pre",
  languageDetectRe: /\b([\w-]+)-preformatted\b/
});

hljs.addPlugin(new CopyButtonPlugin());

hljs.highlightAll();
</script>

<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/@@picocss/pico@@2/css/pico.slate.min.css">
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="global.css">
@end html
@end ifhtml

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Pimacs: (pimacs).               An Emacs client for Pi Coding Agent.
@end direntry

@node Top
@top Pimacs User Manual

Pimacs is an Emacs client for Pi Coding Agent.

@menu
* Introduction::
* Setup::
* Usage::
* Sandbox::
* How It Works::
* Keybindings::
* Custom Variables::
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

Pimacs is an Emacs client for @uref{https://pi.dev/, Pi Coding Agent}.
It provides an interactive interface to the Pi Coding Agent directly
from Emacs.

@node Setup
@chapter Setup

@section Install the Pimacs Agent

First, install the Pimacs agent using npm:

@example
npm install -g --ignore-scripts @@earendil-works/pi-coding-agent
@end example

Then start Pimacs and run @code{/login} to configure your provider:

@example
pi
@end example

@section Install @code{pimacs.el}

Add the following to your Emacs configuration:

@lisp
(use-package pimacs
  :ensure t
  :vc (:url "git@@github.com:ananthakumaran/pimacs.el.git"
       :rev :newest)
  :commands (pimacs-chat))
@end lisp

@node Usage
@chapter Usage

Run @kbd{M-x pimacs-chat} from any file in your project to start a Pimacs chat
session.  Use a prefix argument (@kbd{C-u M-x pimacs-chat}) to start
multiple chats on the same project.

The chat buffer is read-only except for the prompt input area.  Use
@kbd{RET} to submit a prompt and @kbd{C-j} to insert a newline.  Press
@kbd{i} from anywhere in the chat buffer to move point to the prompt
input area.

@menu
* Slash Commands::
* File Name Completion::
* Bash::
* Sending Context::
* Images::
* State Lines::
@end menu

@node Slash Commands
@section Slash Commands

@uref{https://pi.dev/docs/latest/usage#slash-commands, Slash commands}
support completion in the prompt buffer.  Type @kbd{/} and press
@kbd{C-M-i} (or any key bound to completion) to see available commands.

In addition to the commands listed below, extension commands, prompt
templates, and skills registered with the Pimacs agent can also be
invoked via slash commands.  These are fetched automatically from the
agent and included in the completion list.

Angle brackets @code{<>} denote required arguments, square brackets
@code{[]} denote optional arguments.

@multitable @columnfractions .25 .15 .6
@headitem Command @tab Arguments @tab Description
@item @code{/compact}
@tab @code{[prompt]}
@tab Manually compact context, optionally with custom instructions.
@item @code{/clone}
@tab
@tab Duplicate the current active branch into a new session.
@item @code{/copy}
@tab
@tab Copy last assistant message to clipboard.
@item @code{/cycle-model}
@tab
@tab Cycle through available models.
@item @code{/cycle-thinking-level}
@tab
@tab Cycle through thinking levels.
@item @code{/exit}
@tab
@tab Quit pimacs.
@item @code{/export}
@tab @code{[file]}
@tab Export session to HTML.
@item @code{/fork}
@tab
@tab Create a new session from a previous user message.
@item @code{/model}
@tab
@tab Switch models.
@item @code{/name}
@tab @code{<name>}
@tab Set session display name.
@item @code{/new}
@tab
@tab Start a new session.
@item @code{/quit}
@tab
@tab Quit pimacs.
@item @code{/reload}
@tab
@tab Reload extensions, skills and prompts.
@item @code{/resume}
@tab
@tab Pick from previous sessions.
@item @code{/session}
@tab
@tab Show session file, ID, messages, tokens, and cost.
@item @code{/set-auto-compaction}
@tab
@tab Set auto compaction.
@item @code{/set-auto-retry}
@tab
@tab Set auto retry.
@item @code{/set-follow-up-mode}
@tab
@tab Set follow-up mode.
@item @code{/set-steering-mode}
@tab
@tab Set steering mode.
@item @code{/set-thinking-level}
@tab
@tab Set thinking level.
@end multitable

@node File Name Completion
@section File Name Completion

Type @kbd{@@} followed by a partial file path to trigger file name
completion in the prompt buffer.  The completion backend is controlled
by @code{pimacs-file-completion-backend}.

@node Bash
@section Bash

Prefix a command with @code{!} to run it in Bash.  Use @code{!!} to
run a command without adding it to the conversation context.

@example
! echo "hello"
@end example

@node Sending Context
@section Sending Context

You can send contextual information from any buffer to the Pimacs chat
prompt.

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .65
@headitem Command @tab Description
@item @code{pimacs-send-region} @tab Append the selected region to the prompt input.
@item @code{pimacs-send-filename} @tab Append the current buffer's filename (prefixed with @code{@@}) to the prompt input.
@item @code{pimacs-send-flycheck-errors} @tab Append the Flycheck errors at point to the prompt input.  Falls back to all current errors in the buffer when there are none at point.
@end multitable

@node Images
@section Images

You can attach images to your prompt to provide visual context to the
agent.  Images are displayed as thumbnail previews above the prompt
input area and are sent along with your message.  The agent may also
render images inline in its responses, for example when using the
@code{read} tool on a file that contains images.

@subsection Supported Formats

The following image formats are supported:

@itemize @bullet
@item PNG
@item JPEG
@item GIF
@item WebP
@end itemize


Drag an image file from your file manager and drop it into the Pimacs
chat buffer, or paste a supported image from the clipboard via
@code{yank-media}.  To remove an attached image, click on the
thumbnail with the mouse, or place point on it and press
@kbd{backspace} or @kbd{delete}.

@node State Lines
@section State Lines

The header line displays session context and model information.  The
mode line displays the current agent state.  Customize them with the
@code{pimacs-header-line-format} and @code{pimacs-mode-line-format}
defcustoms.  Both accept strings and state components; use
@code{:spacer} to right-align following components.

@example
(setq pimacs-header-line-format
      '(:context_usage :spacer
        (:model face font-lock-function-name-face)))
@end example

See @code{pimacs-header-line-format} for available components.  A
component may also be a function that receives the current state plist.

@node Sandbox
@chapter Sandbox

To run Pimacs inside a sandbox, customize @code{pimacs-executable} and
@code{pimacs-flags}:

@lisp
(setq pimacs-executable "nono")
(setq pimacs-flags '("run" "--silent" "--profile" "pi" "--allow-cwd" "--" "pi"
                 "--tools" "read,bash,edit,write,grep,find,ls"))
@end lisp

@node How It Works
@chapter How It Works

Emacs starts Pimacs in @uref{https://pi.dev/docs/latest/rpc, RPC mode}.
In this setup, Pimacs handles the agent logic while Emacs provides the
user interface. Some features, such as @code{/login} and
@code{/logout}, are not
@uref{https://github.com/earendil-works/pi/issues/885, supported}
because they are not currently exposed through the RPC API.

@node Keybindings
@chapter Keybindings

@section Chat Buffer Keybindings

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .3 .5
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description
@item @kbd{RET}
@tab @code{pimacs-visit-item}
@tab Jump to the source location at point; with a prefix argument, open
in another window
@item @kbd{C-g}
@tab @code{pimacs-abort}
@tab Abort the current operation
@item @kbd{TAB}, @kbd{C-i}
@tab @code{pimacs-toggle-section}
@tab Toggle visibility of the section at point
@item @kbd{n}, @kbd{M-n}
@tab @code{pimacs-goto-next-section}
@tab Move to the next section
@item @kbd{N}
@tab @code{pimacs-goto-next-user-message}
@tab Move to the next user message
@item @kbd{p}, @kbd{M-p}
@tab @code{pimacs-goto-previous-section}
@tab Move to the previous section
@item @kbd{P}
@tab @code{pimacs-goto-previous-user-message}
@tab Move to the previous user message
@item @kbd{l}, @kbd{M-g l}
@tab @code{pimacs-goto-last-section}
@tab Jump to the most recent section
@item @kbd{i}
@tab @code{pimacs-focus-prompt}
@tab Focus the prompt input field
@item @kbd{q}
@tab @code{pimacs-quit-chat}
@tab Quit the chat buffer
@end multitable

@section Prompt Input Keybindings

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .3 .5
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description
@item @kbd{C-g}
@tab @code{pimacs-abort}
@tab Abort the current operation
@item @kbd{M-p}
@tab @code{pimacs-previous-prompt}
@tab Recall the previous prompt from history
@item @kbd{M-n}
@tab @code{pimacs-next-prompt}
@tab Recall the next prompt from history
@item @kbd{C-r}
@tab @code{pimacs-search-prompt}
@tab Search prompt history
@item @kbd{RET}
@tab @code{widget-field-activate}
@tab Send the current prompt
@item @kbd{M-RET}
@tab @code{pimacs-send-prompt-alternate}
@tab Send the prompt using the alternate streaming behavior
@item @kbd{M-g l}
@tab @code{pimacs-goto-last-section}
@tab Jump to the most recent section
@end multitable

@node Custom Variables
@chapter Custom Variables

@c custom-variables-start

@defopt pimacs-use-ansi-colors @code{t}

Whether to render ANSI colors in widget and status output.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-file-completion-backend @code{'project}

Completion backend for @-prefixed file paths in prompts.
@code{project} uses @code{project-files} to list files in the current project.
@code{file} uses @code{file-name-all-completions} to list files under the project root.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-prompt-history-max-size @code{500}

Maximum number of prompt history entries to keep.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-resume-max-sessions @code{100}

Maximum number of recent sessions to list when resuming a session.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-prompt-streaming-behavior @code{'followUp}

Default streaming behavior for prompts.

@code{steer}: Queue the message while the agent is running.  It is delivered
after the current assistant turn finishes executing its tool calls,
before the next LLM call.

@code{followUp}: Wait until the agent finishes.  Message is delivered only
when agent stops.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-slash-commands

@lisp
'(("model" pimacs-select-model 0 "Switch models")
  ("new" pimacs-new-session 0 "Start a new session")
  ("reload" pimacs-reload 0 "Reload extensions, skills and prompts")
  ("resume" pimacs-resume 0 "Pick from previous sessions")
  ("compact" pimacs-compact 1 "Manually compact context, optionally with custom instructions")
  ("set-auto-compaction" pimacs-set-auto-compaction 0 "Set auto compaction")
  ("set-auto-retry" pimacs-set-auto-retry 0 "Set auto retry")
  ("session" pimacs-session-stats 0 "Show session file, ID, messages, tokens, and cost")
  ("name" pimacs-set-session-name 1 "Set session display name")
  ("set-thinking-level" pimacs-set-thinking-level 0 "Set thinking level")
  ("cycle-model" pimacs-cycle-model 0 "Cycle through available models")
  ("cycle-thinking-level" pimacs-cycle-thinking-level 0 "Cycle through thinking levels")
  ("set-steering-mode" pimacs-set-steering-mode 0 "Set steering mode")
  ("set-follow-up-mode" pimacs-set-follow-up-mode 0 "Set follow-up mode")
  ("fork" pimacs-fork 0 "Create a new session from a previous user message")
  ("clone" pimacs-clone 0 "Duplicate the current active branch into a new session")
  ("copy" pimacs-copy 0 "Copy last assistant message to clipboard")
  ("export" pimacs-export 1 "Export session to HTML")
  ("quit" pimacs-quit-chat 0 "Quit pimacs")
  ("exit" pimacs-quit-chat 0 "Quit pimacs"))
@end lisp

Alist mapping slash command names to command specs.

Each entry is (NAME COMMAND MAX-ARGS DESCRIPTION) where NAME is the command
string without the leading slash, COMMAND is a command symbol,
MAX-ARGS is 0 or 1 indicating the number of optional string
arguments the command accepts, and DESCRIPTION is a short
description string.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-insert-tool-args-functions

@lisp
'(("read" . pimacs--insert-read-args)
  ("write" . pimacs--insert-write-args)
  ("edit" . pimacs--insert-edit-args)
  ("bash" . pimacs--insert-bash-args)
  ("grep" . pimacs--insert-grep-args)
  ("find" . pimacs--insert-find-args)
  ("ls" . pimacs--insert-ls-args))
@end lisp

Alist mapping tool names to inserter functions.

Each entry is (TOOL-NAME . FUNCTION) where FUNCTION is called
with ARGS plist to insert formatted tool call arguments.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-insert-tool-result-functions

@lisp
'(("bash" . pimacs--insert-bash-result)
  ("read" . pimacs--insert-read-result)
  ("write" . pimacs--insert-write-result)
  ("edit" . pimacs--insert-edit-result)
  ("grep" . pimacs--insert-grep-result)
  ("find" . pimacs--insert-find-result)
  ("ls" . pimacs--insert-ls-result))
@end lisp

Alist mapping tool names to result inserter functions.

Each entry is (TOOL-NAME . FUNCTION) where FUNCTION is called
with (CONTENT DETAILS ARGS) to insert the tool execution result.
CONTENT is a list of content items.  Use @code{pimacs--insert-content} to render
it, or @code{pimacs--content-text} to extract text from content.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-visit-tool-result-functions

@lisp
'(("read" . pimacs--visit-read-result)
  ("write" . pimacs--visit-write-result)
  ("edit" . pimacs--visit-edit-result)
  ("grep" . pimacs--visit-grep-result))
@end lisp

Alist mapping tool names to result visitor functions.

Each entry is (TOOL-NAME . FUNCTION) where FUNCTION is called
with (DETAILS ARGS) to visit the relevant location of the tool result.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-visit-tool-call-functions

@lisp
'(("read" . pimacs--visit-read-call)
  ("write" . pimacs--visit-write-call)
  ("edit" . pimacs--visit-edit-call))
@end lisp

Alist mapping tool names to call visitor functions.

Each entry is (TOOL-NAME . FUNCTION) where FUNCTION is called
with (ARGS) to visit the relevant location of the tool call.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-insert-custom-message-functions @code{'()}

Alist mapping custom message types to inserter functions.

Each entry is (CUSTOM-TYPE . FUNCTION) where FUNCTION is called
with the message plist to insert the custom message content.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-send-pop-to-chat @code{t}

Whether to pop to the chat buffer after sending region, filename or errors.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-sync-request-timeout @code{2}

The number of seconds to wait for a sync response.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-executable @code{"pi"}

Pimacs command executable name.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-process-environment @code{'()}

List of extra environment variables to use when starting pimacs.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-flags @code{'()}

List of additional flags to provide when starting pimacs.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-log-rpc @code{nil}

When non-nil, log all RPC JSON to @code{pimacs-log-rpc-file}.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-log-rpc-file @code{(expand-file-name "pimacs.el.log" (temporary-file-directory))}

File to write RPC JSON log entries to.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-header-line-format @code{'(:context_usage " (" :compaction_mode ")" :spacer "(" :provider ") " :model " • " :thinking_level)}

Format of the Pimacs chat header line.

Strings are displayed literally.  Functions are called with the state
plist and their returned values are displayed.  A keyword component can
include text properties using @code{propertize} syntax.  For example:
"@code{(:model face font-lock-function-name-face)}".

The following keywords are replaced with state information.

Session state keywords:
@code{:model}                    Model identifier.
@code{:provider}                 Model provider.
@code{:thinking_level}           Thinking level.
@code{:session_name}             Session name.
@code{:compaction_mode}          @code{auto} or @code{manual}.
@code{:message_count}            Message count.
@code{:pending_message_count}    Pending message count.

Session statistics keywords:
@code{:user_messages}            User message count.
@code{:assistant_messages}       Assistant message count.
@code{:tool_calls}               Tool call count.
@code{:tool_results}             Tool result count.
@code{:total_messages}           Total message count.
@code{:input_tokens}             Input token count.
@code{:output_tokens}            Output token count.
@code{:cache_read_tokens}        Cache-read token count.
@code{:cache_write_tokens}       Cache-write token count.
@code{:total_tokens}             Total token count.
@code{:cost}                     Session cost.
@code{:context_usage}            Context tokens and context window.
@code{:context_tokens}           Context token count.
@code{:context_window}           Context window size.

UI keywords:
@code{:agent_state}              Current agent state.
@code{:spinner}                  Active agent spinner.
@code{:spacer}                   Space that right-aligns all following entries.

Use at most one @code{:spacer}.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-mode-line-format @code{'(" Pimacs " :agent_state :spinner)}

Format of the Pimacs mode-line entry.

See @code{pimacs-header-line-format} for available components.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-align-markdown-tables @code{t}

Whether to align markdown tables while rendering assistant output.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-section-autohide-count @code{2}

Automatically hide older chat sections beyond this count.
This helps reduce clutter by collapsing earlier responses when the
conversation grows long.  When nil, auto hiding is disabled and no
sections are hidden automatically.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-section-padding @code{"\n\n"}

String inserted between sections to control the visual gap.
Increase or decrease this value to adjust spacing between sections.
@end defopt

@defopt pimacs-section-visibility-indicators @code{'(pimacs-section-fringe-bitmap> . pimacs-section-fringe-bitmapv)}

Fringe bitmaps used to indicate section visibility.

The car is used for hidden sections and the cdr for visible sections.
Set this to nil to disable fringe indicators.
@end defopt

@c custom-variables-end

@bye
